---
title: Gig Economy
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-03-12 14:30:00
category: lecture
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - lecture
    - week-10
---

##### Prof. Nick Dyer-Witheford

Ok, good afternoon, thanks for being here. Alarming and inconvenient as it is to be at University during the pandemic; the COVID-19 pandemic. I don't know how many of you follow the news, or buisness news. We are not only at the center of a health crisis, but also a stock market crisis. This means that you are in fact experiencing one of those massive economic crashes which are an ongoing feature of capitalism. A crash very similar to other events that we have spoken about in this course; whether this be the 2000 dot com crash, or the 2008 crash. You will have a much better understanding of panic and fear of the possible concequences of economic recession, job loss, etc. This gives us a window into what life is like inside of capitalism. 

COVID-19 is a good way to illustrate the gig-economy, where it shows the sharp inequalities. As I would like to demonstrate today is that the gig economy is a very large characteristic of today's **platform capitalism**. This virus really illuminates this issue very well. Discussing this as a second part of labour conditions in platform capitalism that we began last week with the crisis of work within google. We're going to go well beyond the spread of this. 

## What is the Gig Economy

Now, this relates to the article that you were reading this week. Many of the efforts in the formation of new trade unions, etc. are happening in the area that we describe as the Gig Economy. We will also talk about the concepts from the two course books. I will start by mentioning the definition that Mosco give in six-or-so pages where he talks about what is the gig economy. So, the way Mosco defines it as 'one off' jobs rather than 'long term employment'. This is accompanied by relatively low wages, insecure (precarious) work, work that usually has no benefits in terms of pension plans, insurance, etc. associated with it. The gig economy has become strongly associated with workers hired in a digital marketplace. Jobs assigned on smartphone / laptop. Mosco makes the connection between the Gig economy and Gigabytes (large amounts of computation info). I don't think that this is the origin of the Gig Economy. Many of you who are musicians would know that a 'gig' is a one night performance. Many of you may be familiar with musicians going from performance to performance. It has been migrated from the music industry to companies that have a 'strong tech presence', according to Mosco. 

I imagine here that a number of you probably have a number of experiences in this. I understand that there is an age limit on an Uber, or a certain platform as a survey, we're going to talk about this. There may be some gig workers here amongst you. Opinions of this kind of work, the upturns and downturns. What is called as gig economy work which does not tie people to one employer or to one type of work on an ongoing basis has some benefits in variety and flexibility; giving a greater degree of freedom. And inside of this flexibility, are certain amounts of exploitation (what your employer is expecting you to provide on your own [time, equipment, initiative, etc]). The often quite low payrates and lack of benefits.

This is where we come into COVID-19, the Coronavirus, you can see these two screenshots that I took off my laptop this morning, which had just been posted within a matter of hours, one of which coming from MIT, and the other coming from 'Coronavirus divides tech workers into the "worthy" and "unworthy" sick'. For the health issues that we are experiencing today, for workers that have perminant jobs who have to take time off work, the impact is much greater for these types of casualized or insecure work; which I usually define as the gig economy. Such workers often don't have employment insurance, health insurance, there is no provision for them to take a certain amount of days off with pay, and no financial cushion. The point that this article in The Guradian is making is that places like Google and Amazon are making in their rather luxurious campuses, they are being told to work from home. The day-to-day workers are still required to come into work if they want to be paid. this is really the class division within platform capitalism. This should be noted as the problems with the gig economy and cause for social tension.

Mosco brings up two ways that the gig economy works, one of which is the online click work, and the other is enterprises similar to Uber, Uber Eats, SkipTheDishes, etc. The structure of this lecture, we'll start by looking at Amazon's [Mechanical Turk](https://www.mturk.com/), and then I'm going to provide a bit of theoretical background about how work should be analysed. We will at the end look at a second example, Uber. Example, theory example. I hope that that works to some degree.

## Mechanical Turk
Does anyone here make money from mechanical turk? This is one of the many limbs of Amazon, Amazon Web Services. As far as anyone can tell, it gets its name from a 18/19th c. device, that was a fairground attraction where there was an exotic and orientalized turk, someone from Turkey, and was reported to be a from of robot, or human. It was considered to be interesting. Could play chess as a human being. This was actually a human being hidden within the mechanical mechanical turk. I think that this is being doctored as a name for this particular platform is that it's a form of Human-driven wage-work service. It's a platform that is run by Amazon in which employees can hire online click workers to preform various types of work, whether it be conducting online surveys, identifying particular images, various types of editing work, etc. This is a sort of crowd-sourced click work. It is essentially drawing on a pool of workers from all around the world. They're called turkers, by no means all of them may be bidding on jobs, etc. When you have such a huge pool of global labour to draw on, it's relatively easy to find people that will work for relatively or perhaps very low wages. It's typically contract and has no question of benefits, insurance cappages, etc. It's one of the ways that Amazon has gotten 'artificial artificial intelligence'. It's almost automatic, as if it's some incredible digital intelligence. It's relatively low-paid intelligence from all around the world. If we wanted to see what the life of a Turker looked like, this would be a pretty good idea.

[Learn more of Mechanical Turk](https://www.mturk.com/)

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/OjEdLZXzqJI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/EZcQui_REt8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

She predicts that this crowd source work is going to get bigger. This sort of work that she was doing was amongst the more routinised, repetitive jobs. I think that you got from her a pretty balanced set of some of the benefits and downside of this type of work. No one is going to miss you if you're gone. So, let me go now from that practical example to try and place the gig economy within a larger context of political economic thought about the issue of work. Because, well up to this point in the course we've discussed corporate organization, involvement of state, and business models that might appear through the lens of corporate managers. The issue of work has always been central to the work of poltical economists, which have near always been placed under the headings **labour** and **capital**. Labour is people who have to sell capacity to work at a job for wage or salary. Within the labour force, the different rates that they can sell their labour, for example the amount I can make as a 10 yr. prof vs the amount you can make as students. For the sake of it, capital is employers who hire labour. The relation between labour and capital form some of the conflicts we are discussing within platform capitalism will occur. What kinds of constraints on your freedom, harassed, bullied at work, all of these have rights that to some degree have to be fought for. I'm going to skip back for a moment to the past in which political economy had its origins, where the two views, one represented by **Adam Smith** who believed that the market is the best form of society because it maximizes individual freedom. **Karl Marx** believed that capital is based on exploitation of workers by owners. 

This is the real basics of what often the labour theory, the real driving force is the amount of work that can be put into economic production. Smith saw the work relation as individual decisions. In the market, we're all making decisions about buying/selling commodities at a price. In those commodities is that we commodify ourselves in selling our labour. If you're a worker, or an owner of a factory, you're buying other people's labour and the price for labour will depend on supply and demand. Like we saw with Mechanical Turk, a large pool of people are bidding on the work. So, what we're worth is just being sought by the supply and demand. Eg. mercedes benz, loaf of bread. This meant that people were free to get whatever kind of work they wanted to get into. He suggested incredible mobility and didn't see any issue with making profit from hiring other people to do work. An enterpreneur's profits are a reward for risk of investment. Smith talked about capitalism as the "Society of perfect liberty"

Marx took an opposite view. He said that on the surface, it looks exactly what Smith says. He says that underneath the surface appearance of liberty and equality and unconstrained exchange, there is a fundamental inequality; that there is a basic and fundamental division. There are those who own the production machines and raw materials, like the people who owned the things to make the first cheap clothing, etc. they are in a different class. They are different from the working class, who owns nothing but its onw capacity to work (labour power). And the capitalists are in a position to exploit workers, extracting more value, but extracting from them value which gives them a profit much greater than what they pay the workers. Two different thoughts, one much more critical. It's important to stress that these ideas are not matters of theory. They have formed real-world institutions and movements. Smith has produced a group of free-market economics; no gov regulation (neo-liberalism) is essentially an updated version of Adam Smith. Coming out of Adam Smith's thoughts of labour management are taught by schools, like that of Ivey, where they teach a benign way of organizing things. Others have very much made people unionise to reduce the amount of exploitation of work, and to give them the means (strikes, etc.) to claim better wages, etc. and a whole stream of political movements. Political movements, social movements, that have tried to show different ways of selling labour time. I just want to indicate this so we understand these are the discussions that lay in the background of what we talk about when we're speaking about the gig economy.

If we limit our dialect, we still remain in the land of *dead white dudes*, which have divisions coming from recently in truly contemporary analysis... I'm going to go very quickly though a couple of points here as a deep background of the conversations we're going to have on the examples. One of these ideas is feminist... Our concepts of what kind of work is properly rewarded has been deeply and radically altered by the ongoing struggle of the emaciation of women. One foundational element of... When we often think of work, we often talk about waged work. There is a massive amount of unpaid work, which is essential for society. All of this could include the raising and socialization of children, housework, etc. that has been conducted by women, unpaid. Tis could turn one's head around by what we mean by work in society. Women have not only traditionally performed this kind of unpaid work in the home, but have also entered the world of waged work. This is called the double shift, where they work for capital, then come home and do the unpaid work. Additionally, women are often paid less then men, which I believe is somewhere close to $.80/$1 for work of equal value. The stereotyping and exclusions of work, programming, etc. the labelling and branding of that as mens work. Emotional labour tends to be categorized in conventional work as making people feel good, front desk work, people related work, etc. etc. All of this has been intrusistic of the feminist analysis of work. They may also enter higher levels of work, which tends to exclude them from corporate forms of leadership, etc. The equality of life in the workplace, sexual harassment, barriers to higher paid work, etc.

More recently, this sort of map of labour may be looked at as critical race theory, postcolonial theory, by which all of this is wrapped up around racialized identities, where there are a set of assumption of unwaged work and why certain types of jobs should be considered cheap labour. Marx realized the degree to which capitalist societies are based on the brutal reality of large scale slavery, particulary in the United States; where slavery was entirely racialized. A question of the legacy of slavery, how it's played into market society, and how similar issues attend issues around migrant labour, various forms of wage discrimination, and the... As we saw at play around the mechanical turk and the kinds of issues we see when we connect different kinds of work where conditions are radically different. It's a lot of how big tech has outsourced much of their work to China, where workers would struggle, then push up wage rates. Anyone of these last 3-4 slides could become it's own course within itself. If you're thinking of writing about work conflicts in platform capitalism, you need to think of how it might work into this. Issues of class, race, gender. 

When we come back, we'll look back into this and talk about the Gig Economy and another case study.

``` break ``` 

