---
title: Gender Gap
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-03-05 14:30:00
category: lecture
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - lecture
    - week-9
---

After the internmission of the reading week, we will be resuming regular services. The next theme is the Conflict in Platform Capitalism Essay 2. I am not going to repeat again. In general, we will be picking up on the thread of the discussion of Camebridge Analytica, Privacy invasions, etc. And the development of Platform Capitalism and kinds of conflict that are listed there. Your tutorial leaders brought up that you were critical about Platform Capitalism, and looking in conflicts in Platform Capitalism are in fact very far from being negative, but rather realistic. I've pointed out that issues of political economy of media are questions of power and weath, and issues of both wealth and issues of power, who gets who to do the bidding. There are issues where people are in conflict. One would have to be an idiot to not look at conflict in our organization. It's not because we raise these questions of tension or friction that we need to absorb, then relinquish your social media and high-tech communications. I am not dictating to you what side you should favour in these conflicts, but I do want you to understand in a sufficient depth that you can see your own biases around these issues. We are going to take a critical perspective means that we are going to deal with the reality of platform captialsm rather than the fantacy. 

## Google: Platform Capitalism's Big Success?
As an example, I am going to take Google as a case study, one of the bigger success stories of platform capitalism. I'm going to use this study, beginning with a concrete example and next week we will work backwords. I think it's useful to put something in our backpack that we can refer to and say this is the sort of thing that we're talking about. If we choose Google, it's another good look at a major specemen, we've payed attention to both Facebook and Amazon, but Google is a very very important exemplar of Platform Capitalism. It's one of the most attractive examples. All of us in this room, it would be very rare that someone in a University would not use Google. "Google it" has become a catchword of everyday life. It's also a massively successful company, hugely profitable; one of the big 5 tech companies that occupies the ranks of the most highly market valued capitalist corporations in the world. In addition to Google's Search Function, it offers numerous products: ranging from Docs, YouTube, Android based-mobile phones, etc. that Google also produces. Something that is inspiring story of how Google came into being. It's a good example of garage-based invention: Larry Page and Sergei Brin prefected the algorithm by which they based this venture. In the course of this, they have amassed massive capital, and have since retired from leadership roles of itself and its holding company Alphabet. It makes him the 7th richest person in the world, and brin the 10th richest person in the world. Google has been extremely good to them. Something that is also interesting about Google is their corporate motto -- "Don't do evil", where they recognize their corporate social... Idea - taking google's approach to search from those of competitors that mixed in paid ads with search results. They wanted to have a clean search engine. This very very clear moral pronouncement that comes with the vast amount of data coming from using your search engine. 

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/PA54HWLZ2e4" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Google is also seemingly a good place to work, located in Mountainview California, perks, conveniences, and high salaries that can come from working as a high tech professional for one of these giant high-tech corporations.

## Google's "Civil War"
There's a mild note of joking caution; is it too good to be true? There is some of that here at Western. Is it surprising that there is a crisis in labour-management crisis, which has been determined Google's Civil War. So, what are the issues in this highly utopian setting that create tension and unhappiness. I'm going to talk about three. The first is a talk about precarious and part time work in issues of ethnicity. The second is military contracting, and what is being produced by that work. The third is the issues in sexism and sexual harassment, which were central in the Google Walkouts of 2019. I'm going to give the most attention to the third issue, but I'm going to give it context of the previous issues. Not only being issues of womens rights but also workers rights. Let's proceed through this. The first issue has to do with what is called precarious work, which usually means insecure, part-time or contract work without the security, or long-term benefits of full time work. I'm going to show a video called "Workers Leaving the Googleplex". In summary, it concerns the way in which Wilson, a temporary worker at Google attempted to document the conditions of other temporary workers that were outside the circle of Google perks and benefits. A sort of second class group of Google workers. You'll understand this as a joke or kind of commentary on a very famous film one of which the first films ever made and projected. 

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/BO0EkMKfgJI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe style="width: 55vw; height: 45vh;" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/w0RTgOuoi2k" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

It's called "Exiting the Factory" (1895). Leaving the Googleplex, the conditions around industrial factories haven't gone away from the information age industry. 

