---
title: Intro
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-09 14:30:00
layout: category-post
---
## Big Tech
- Companies such as Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Microsoft
    - Provide highly specific ads for highly specific products, relies on tracking you. Places you in crosshairs: studies your life, habits, etc.
    - At the very forefront of researching digital technology
    - At the very front of the line in the development of Artificial Intelligence that question what a human is and where a machine ends
    - Bezos, etc. are the richest, top 0.1%, posess large amounts of commercial power
    - Also been adopted by lesser, but still important companies; exempify a mode of doing buisness - **platform capitalism** - subject of the course
- We are not going to focus on these particular companies, but instead look at politcal economy.

## Three ways of Looking at Media
These are all about how we look at cultural texts and interperating them.
- **Cutltural Studies:** Meanings and identities
- **Political Economy:** Money and Power
- **Technoculture:** Machines and Networks
    - Examining the systems of tech: cloud computing, IoT, high speed netowrks, understanding media as a technical phenomenon.

## Political Economy of Media
- Elevator Pitch description: An approach that deals wit hthe relationship between power, wealth and media.
    - At beginning of class, we identified [5 different corperations](#Big-Tech), this plays a very large role in how media is distributed.
- Who owns and controls media.
- How media get revenues and make profits
    - One of the longstanding issues of interest has been how the workers are managed?
- The role of advertising and surveillance
    - Draw on information that is being gathered on you.
    - Information generated by **your** everyday life.
- Thinking seriously about who owns and controls media.
- The situations of workers in media
    - In media corperation, what are the power dynamics between capital and labour?
    - All the way from the unpaid internship to the timeline contract work up to stars, multimilionares...
    - Selling your time...
- How governments do or do not regulat meida
    - To what degree is media governed by the states? are there regulations on how much data a company can own?
    - Is there an extent as to the type of information being circulated?
    - Fake news?
    - Environmental impacts...
- Media as part of captialism
- How all these factors affect the content of media
- Political economy puts into the context of media and power

## Corporate and Critical

|   Corperate              |   Critical  |
| ------------------------- | :------------------------ |
|   Corperate political economy is concerned with the issues of ownership, organization, production, advertising and labour to figure out how to make bigger profits, ``moentizing`` media content  |   Critical political economy is concerned with all these issues but with the aim of reforming (eg. reduce inequalities and ecological devestaiton) or revolution replacement by another system|

## Big Tech, Big Controversies
Over the past couple of years, we have seen a large amount of controversy around the big 5 - techlash: companies against facebook or amazon. We have seen a large amount of control falling under these tech companies. Once you name one, you see different way of life. Surveillance and Privacy: Snowden Datadumps. Looking at content circulated on networks owned by these corperations. We have seen largescale protests in gig-economy work conditions from Amazon warehouses to Uber drivers. We have seen issues in Gender, wherein large companies in Silicon Valley: dramatic walkout of female workers due to sexual harassment in the workplace. Eco effects: media is clean compared to the airline industry, whereas it really is not. The truely tragic events of the past few days in Iran, the whole involvement of large media conversations of cyberwar and digital militarism. Microsoft having multi-billion dollar contract with Pentagon in major defense plays. It is interesting to look at big tech in study.
- "techlash" over
- concentration of wealth and power
- surveillance and privacy
- Responsiblity for 'fake news'
- Gig-economy work conditions
- Gender Gap in high0tech
- Eco effects of big tech
- cyberwar and digital militarism
- much more...

## The Nuts & Bolts
- Readings The Books and short articles on OWL.
- each week you will have 1-2 chapters form the text, and an article to read on OWL.
- The reading for this course is somewhat front-end loaded. I want you to read quite a bit in the first 1/2 of the course so you get some basic context, start to work with them and write papers for this course. Laying groundwork, doing something really worth while

## Week By Week

|   Assignment                |     Date    |
|:----------------------------|:------------|
|   Introduction              | Jan 9th     |
|   How We Got Here           | Jan 16th    |
|   Power, Wealth, Technology | Jan 23th    |
|   Platform Capitalism       | Jan 30th    |
|   Platform Wars             | Feb 6th     |
|   Platform Scandals         | Feb 13th    |
|   Reading Week              | Feb 20th    |
|   Mid-Term Exam             | Feb 27th    |
|   Gender Gap                | March 5th   |
|   Gig Economy               | March 12th  |
|   Heavy Bugsplat            | March 19th  |
|   Public Utility            | March 26th  |
|   Conclusion and Revision   | April 2nd   |
