---
title: Terms / Other
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-02-27 13:00:00
category: lecture
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - review
---

Congrats... You found the page! Glhf!

## Political Economy of Media
Examines power relations (political), economics and the means of communication. It is the sector of media that examines the ownership, control and consequences of surveillance. Political economy of media holds importance because of connections between business and media. The Political Economy of Media looks at where revenues are generated, how advertising / surveillance and the relation to information generated by the consumer. Political Economy can be broken into two parts. **Corporate Political Economy** is concerned with issues of ownership, organization, production, advertising and labour in relation to how it can be (further) monetized. **Critical Political Economy** focuses on the same things, however with a twist of it's own, where instead of looking at how to generate more profit, it is based in eliminating inequalities that exist within labour. 

An example of this would be Apple, one of the big tech five and their labour practices. In the early 2000's, one of the primary manufacturers of the iPhone (Foxconn) had a series of worker suicides, and severely underpaid staff. While the Corporate stance of Political Economy would look at the 

## Big Tech
Made up of companies such as Google, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft and Apple. They provide very highly specific ads for highly specific products and relies heavily on tracking you; placing the consumer in the crosshairs, studying life, habits, etc. These companies are at the forefront of new technologies, and their owners are some of the wealthiest people on earth. Big tech are what examplify Platform Capitalism, broken into Platform and Capitalsim. They exert massive social and commercial power. 

### Platform
A platform is an intermeidary or infrastrucutre that bring consumers and advertisers together. These are FOR PROFIT entities, their business interests being the reason for the ways they act, or their commercial logic. These Platforms are a new business model, distinct from the Fordist and Post-Fordist model. Platforms have a designed core architecture and act to capture and control as much data as possible. This positions platforms in a highly advantageous position for data collection. There are 5 types of platform: Advertising, Cloud, Industrial, Product and Lean each setting itself apart with infrastructure. 

Platforms are typically a cross-subsidized intermediary, wherein they act between different groups (ie. Facebook, Amazon, Google). Each of these companies is unique in the way that they act as an intermediary, but they share two things: infrastructure and cross-subsidization. In Amazon's case, they rent out the cloud as a utility, collecting data at all times through the process. Additionally, Network effects exist within platforms, where high user-counts make it possible for one business to have a monopoly eg: Google (search), Facebook (social media). Finally the core architecture of these platforms is that it acts as an infrastructure for consumers and other businesses alike. 

## Capitalism
Capitalism is rooted in the buying and selling of goods and services for profit. Capitalism emerged from the class of property owners that bought and sold commodities. Eventually, there was a connect to the general marketplace, during the industrial revolution where the manufacturing of products emerged. Capitalism began to spread around the world, class struggle emerged and people were working for low wages. One of the by-products of capitalism was slavery. Areas became colonized and their people became slaves to work in the factories. Capitalism is an outright rejection of ideas by Karl Marx and Adam Smith, where Smith believed that the market works without central authorities and that freedom of choice was important. Both of these theorists were against monopolistic tendencies, etc.

Capitalism is a society that leans towards the commodity, it is a society of general commodification and each day more things are being commodified, such as personal data. It is important to note the relation of capitalism and the state, wherein the free market is often referred to as being 'better' than the state; yet is based in laws and regulation that define how much power a corporation can excert. 

## Techlash
The outright rejection of modern technology itself. Usually aimed at large tech companies and has gained momentum in supporting policies, slowing down innovations, adding taxes, bans and regulation on technologies. 

An example of this would be the large amount of control being held by the big tech five, where if a contrevorsy is named, you see a different way of life, (ie snowden).


### Generalized market exchange
Capacity to work needs to be sold to buy and sell other goods. Companies compete for profits and have strong incentive to increase the speed and scale of goods and services that they provide. 

Eg. Generalized exchange can occour between people, organizations, countries, etc. Participants are not in a position to make individual rewards conditional on behaviour. Eg. helping someone on the side of the road, donating to public good, etc.

### ‘platform capitalism’
The link between power and wealth in relation to media. Interaction between capitalism and technology.

## Laissez-faire Capitalism
Markets were completely unregulated, created a highly volatile environment, like that in the great depression where there were huge unemployment rates, lead to new school of thought (keynesianism). 

Keynesianism is the political economic policy applied to Europe and North America follwoing the crash of the dirty 30's and held sway until the 70's. It was named after John Keynes, who believed that public spending was encouragement to the economy.

## Neoliberalism
Neoliberalism, or new libralism was a deregulation of the market. Neoliberalists believed that government should get out of the economy and allow for less red-tape, and that pushes for competition, no protections, unions, etc. of national industries.

In the media, we can look at the rollback of keynesian, how media itself is a commodity, layoffs in public broadcasting, reduction of regulations for large companies.

### ‘one nation tracked’
Part of the smartphone tracking industries, how companies use geo-locations to identify the location of a consumer. This information is very valuble, high volume, and highly variable information when analytics are combined with it. The topic looks at how valuable geolocation data really is. 

The idea is that companies can predict behaviours because of other data points from other behaviours. Additionally, geo-location data is not obfuscatable, where the data is so personalized that it would be unique.

## Concentration of Ownership
Concentration of ownership is the idea that a sector of the economy is being dominated by a small number of companies. There are two kinds of this: Monopoly and Oligopoly, where mono means one company, and oli means few. Concentration of ownership comes from a group of mergers and acquisitions where companies buy or combine. This results in a conglomerate: a large company with many subsidiaries.

This is an essential part of the political economy of media because it is a thorough examination on the ownership and power relations in the ongoing media. 

### Horizontal Integration
Buying out companies in the same share of the market.

### Vertical Integration
Buying companies in different but connected activities.

## Revenue Streams
How corporations work to commodify media. Two ways:
1. Selling Content: consumers buy things to own them (video games), buy access (movie ticket) or subscribe (nf)

2. Selling Ads: Consumers get content, ads attract attention.
- Gathering Data: Using or selling to another corporation to attract better content and advertising.

## Mega-Mega-Media
5 years ago, mega-media were corporations that would buy smaller companies and gain more control over a sector trying to get a monopoly status. Today, conglomerates are trying to gain control over eachother. 

## Marketization

## Digital Capitalisim

## Commodification

## Mega-Conglomerate

## Net Neutrality
Idea that all internet traffic should be treated the same. Open internet idea. In US: FCC repealed net neutrality. IE: speeds could be throttled for anything other than sponsored or media-company run content. 

## Internet History
### The Military Net
Network founded in 1970's as part of Nuclear War Planning and Research. It was part of the (D)ARPA that was created to enable communications should no other line of communication be viable. The internet was created for a military purpose, and should be looked at through a political lens.

### The Electronic Frontier
USG allowed for allowed for university students and instructors to use the internet for research and rapidly spread connecting more and more people. A this time, internet was text-based. non-commericalized.
### Web 1.0
WWW: 1990's starts to change to the electronic frontier. Introduces graphic display, moving away from only text. Creators that saw the internet was free and open rather than made for profit. USG were interested in the Information Highway (internet) for economic growth. 

Was a response to the economic slump from the mid 70's through 2000's. People looking for major economic boost to help bring economy out of slump.

### The dot.com Bubble
Investments in internet and e-businesses. Digital presence starting to replace brick and mortar stores. ISPs didn't give full internet access, but rather access to websites that paid ISPs for users to access it. There was no clear revenue, many popups. 

### Web 2.0: Tim O’Reilly 2005
After the stock market crash (dot com bubble burst), a new wave of companies appeared, including new 

#### Centralization
Large corps continue to dominate, Ie. Google in search, Facebook in SM (platform owners have become giants).  Concerned with how much power centralized corporations have question social issues and power issues, concentration of ownership and surveillance.

#### Consolidation
Combining legacy media (hollywood) with new media (SV) entering the business together... Relevance being in that hollywood is now second to these new media, currently the big tech 5 hold the most power in media.

#### Commercialization
Advertising as a revenue model causes social concerns.

## Platform Capitalism
A new business model/a new way of organizing business. Distinct from models of the past such as
### Fordist Model
Mass production and mass consumption of one same product. Vertical integration: control over the cars and everything that goes within it.

### Post-Fordist Model
Individualized consumption rather than mass production. Idea of a lean business (cut out unprofitable stuffs). 

## Platforms
Intermediaries and infrastructures: Intermediaries between groups. 

### Intermediaries
between different groups example: buyers, sellers, advertisers, users.

## Infrastructures
Interaction and development are essential, ie: app dev, pages, uber, and the idea is that platforms are typically mono/oligopolies. Facebook is teh monopoly of social networks. Rel: new business model is a connector rather than commodity. Surveillance is what enables profit from this business model.

Capitalize on data through extraction; use cross sub. in order to balance out free services vs. those charged for - charging more than they would if they had nothing free.

### Designed Core Architecture
Platforms have politics, uses power to generate profit: eg. uber - showing more drivers, surge prices, etc.

### Advertising Platform
Idea that data is extracted from users, then data is modified and regurgitated into ad space. Facebook and google have high percentages of ad revenue, where FB brought in 96% of it's profit from ads, and Google brought in 89%. Algorithms are the commodity on these platforms, where users and ads are match pushing the edges of privacy.

### Cloud Platform
Renting out the cloud as a utility. The cloud is a managed resource, where the business does not have to pay a bunch of costs associated with it. IE: providing hardware for people to use remotely.

### Industrial Platform
IoT: Connecting materials, factories to internet, increasing productivity, reducing maint. costs, improving flexibility of building products. Cloud computing essential to the platform; provide space for industrial internet in the cloud. 

### Product Platform
Transforms goods into services that can be rented, being used to recuperate free information goods ie: Spotify, AM, Rolls Royce.

Spotify, Apple Music

### Lean Platform
Basically have nothing; own as little as possible and own minimal amount they possibly could. They profit by outsourcing all the cost and use VC thrown at them assuming that they will become a monopolist.

Uber.

### Cloud Computing
The cloud is a pool of computing resources used by individuals and corporations for a low-maintenance solution. Enables access through smartphone or computer, can be used to store and process information off premise.

#### Data Centres
Data centers are huge information storage centers, thousands of remote servers, need secure, cool and stable locations. Think of data centres as a factory that work on data rather than just store it.

## 3) big data
Can be talking about a specific event, automation, etc. Data is constantly being transmitted to/from devices whether we realize it or not. In the days of digital technologies, we are constantly being monitored, etc.

### Big Data Analytics
Volume: bring the data
Velocity: fast data 
Variety: all the data sources
not just normal data, but rather a repository made up of multiple sources, can be used to predict behaviour.

#### Analytics
Correlates big data sets, targets, profiles, creates predictions, recommendations... Allows conglomerates and advertisers to make calculated business decisions. 

## 2) Internet of Things
Work off small computerized devices that are able to scan, observe and process. Typically embedded in industrial machinery (drones, robots, watches, fridges, apps, sensors), all networked together; machines interact with machines instead of people.

### Covergent Technologies (Mosco)
Internet of things is one of the sources of big data, stored & processed in cloud. One of the points Mosco makes is that big data is that within the realm of mobile phones, not much is really processed on the phone, but rather gets sent to a data center to do the processing. In addition, to doing processing offsite, the cloud platform preforms analytic decisions based on user interaction. An example might be the smartphone, which combine a phone, camera, music player and personal assistant into a single device.

### Anticipatory shipping
This is an Amazon technique that will dispatch products to a nearby center. The idea is that if the customer was about to order, but decided that they don't need it and it shows up at their house anyway, Amazon will give the product to them as a gift. 

# Big Tech 5
Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Facebook all hold monopolies on products, enabling for vertical and horizontal integrations when they buy out smaller companies. 

## Monopoly platforms
Structurally driven to expand range of data extraction purchasing other companies at rapid pace, massive closed expansive and monopolistic platforms. They tend to buy out other platforms, for example Microsoft bought out LinkedIn.  

## Oligopolistic Tendencies
Hold high position in a given field. Engage in competition with each other. Srnicek said in his video that you may think of the big ad companies. Data is the new oil, wherein the importance of the silo and domains of popular platforms create new possibilities of information.

## Network Effects
More people on it, more people join. Networks exploit users through collection of data, on media like that of a social media platform. The idea is that if there is one telephone in the world, it's pretty heckin useless. Metcalfe's law: the value of a network is proportional to the number of systems connected to the network. 

## Convergence
Entry in the same domains which is also competitive. Platofrms start from a core business segment , but then expand to other similar areas of business. It starts to bring companies into compeititon with eachother IE: Apple iOS vs Google's Android... The convergence of marketing and communication will mark a significant change for both professions and it's tricky to predict the shape of thing to come with any certainty.

## Silos
A silo is when a consumer is locked in a bubble of proprietal systems, focusing on the consumer rather the company itself. 

Example: Netflix pushing Originals versus content they have to pay licensing on. Apple's 'Ecosystem'.

## Huawei
Accused of state-espionage and installing back doors on US 5G infrastructure. One of the largest tech companies in the rollout of 5G networks. US concerned that there is possibility for military communications to be intercepted. In 2012, US banned companies from using network equipment, 2018 bans us companies to supply huawei. ISSUE: Cyber-Espionage

## The Cambridge Analytica Scandal
2016 Elections, Camebridge Analytica was able to extract data from Facebook users, paying users a small payout for doing a survey. When this happened, CA harvested the data and was able to make very pointed discoveries about Facebook Users. Wylie wrote a book "Mindf*ck" about the topic, discussing the implications of what Camebridge Analytica did.

## Facebook
Facebook is the platform capitalist at the root of this century. Google and Facebook serve roughly 75-80% of ads on the internet. Because these networks are free, they are able to match you with advertisements they think relevant to you; Facebook's prestiegous advertising platform track things you like, ads clicked, and device and location settings. The dataset gathered from this information is highly lucrative to advertisers. With the data, you can compare character, temperament, attitude, etc. on Facebook.

## The psychometrics institute:
A data scientist in Camebridge paid Facebook users to do tests, measured 5 traits: openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness and neuroticism.

## Italian automatism
Collective cooperation of knowledge became a source of value. It entailed the labour process being increasingly material, oriented towards use and manipulation of symbols. 

## Nick Srnicek 5 types of platform capitalism
Cloud, Lean, Ad, Industrial, Product. 

### Advertising platforms:
are what fostered the emergence of the most current technical trends, from the sharing economy to the industrial internet. 

### Cloud platforms: 
Amazon thought they could outsource their network, after making it incredibly fast and stable they sought out to sell compute, storage, and network. 

### Industrial platforms 
is the idea of embedding sensors, etc., typically combined with cloud platforms for analytic and processing.  Linked ot internet.

### Lean Platforms:
A company with only IP, they do not own anything other than their software. Eg. Uber, etc. Was pre-profit model of 1990's. Platforms range from specialized firms. Outsource all of the things.

## The long downturn
The administration has made economic policy as if it believes that once financial institutions and financial markets are restored, credit will start flowing and growth will follow. This would be in keeping with its analysis of our economic problems, but ignores the deeper roots of the crisis, which lay not so much in the incapacity of financial institutions to lend, as in the overcapacity that has long gripped the global economy.