---
title: Power, Wealth, Technology
author: Brett Petch
date: 2020-01-16 14:30:00
category: tutorial
layout: category-post
---

#### Nick Dyer-Witherford

Today:
1. Recap
2. Three Technoloies: Cloud, IoT, Big Data Analyics
3. Case study: Amazon (Video Essay)
4. The Big Tech 5
5. Essay 1

## Recap: 
Last week we looked at the emergence of technology, in relation to platform capitalism and the changes in the internet. I tried to give a thumbnail sketch in how the intense interest in new forms of digital buisness started to present itself in the 1990's and early 2000's. It really affected the economies since the 1970's. Digital buisness was seen as a neo-liberal agenda for revitalizing the economy. I then pointed out how the economic changes resulted in the internet. With a number of ups and downs, integrating buying / selling on the internet. When this failed in the 2000's, lessons learned from those failures spurred some of the surviving players and new buisnesses drove Web 2.0; which had a more participatory design for engaging in conversation and communities while making money from it. Today, I'd like to talk about how this buisness model is dependant on three technologies: The Cloud, IoT, and Big Data.

## Three Technologies

### Cloud Computing

The remarkably rapid decrease in cost of computing and accessibility to devices and the amount of computing power used by NASA in the early space program is at your fingertips (smartphones). One of the important developments is Cloud Computing, the very simple idea is that when you send an email, use an app or play a game using a digital device, it is quite likely that a large part of the processing is not happening on the device you're using. The new heightened speeds of connectivity have made it possible for computing and storage of data to be conducted far away using "the cloud". So what is this Cloud? While it sounds like air, it is really heavy. It looks like ugly buildings (as seen on slide) and occours in cool, secure earthquake proof data centres. 

#### Data Centers
Huge info sotrage centres host tens of thousands of servers. They are often in remote, cool, stable locations. The companies that own these buildings, which are often members of the Big Tech 5 will store and conduct processes for other buisnesses and corperations. More like a data factory than a data locker. Little of what you are doing is likely happening somewhere like Nebraska, Alaska, etc. 

## Internet of Things
An increasing number of material every-day objects are themselves computerized and contain digital sensors. Many computers which are capable of monitoring their own operations, such as a smart refridgerator, thermostat, etc. Is almost certainly sending data to a corperate vendor. This means that we are moving through the life, using apps such as Fitness Applicaitons, etc. to meausure your daily runs, different levels of excertion, stress etc. have the capacity to make calculation about what you're doing as well as relay it to a network of datacentres. It's not just factories, prime examples of the IoT are amazon echo, using radio services (like spotify), etc. This leads into the idea of having microchipped bodies. 

### How Human is the Internet?
- More traffic is generated by bots than humans (2017 Internet Trends Report)
- In 2020 there will be 26x conected things than people (IDC)
- In 5 years, smartphones, desktops and tablets outnumbered by computers in "smart" homes, offices, cities and cars (Cisco)

## Big Data
Could be talking about a specific event, whether it be the tragedy that was the Iranian Airlines flight a few days ago. Highly automated cars providing information about speed, braking, etc. or it could be about people. We are constantly spilling off from our devices whether we know it or not. 
- Big Data = Increasing amounts of information available from digital technology
- Social media and mobile phones
- About events, sstems, people
- Becoming available in ever-greater volime, velocity, and variety.

### Big Data and Analytics
The term algorithm, which sounds complicated is really just the application of procedural instructions that can be set to data. Just like a recipe or formula for processing information. That may make it seem not immediately exciting, it amounts to Data Mining. Data mining is the discovering patterns, trends or preferences that are revealed by sorting the data. For those of you interested in buisness, advertising will know how fundamental this has become for the targeting of advertisments. On it rests more precise things. If you can actively look at active streams of data, you can discover that from classic data mining case was the discovery made by Walmart when they put together records of purchases. They discovered that men that bought diapers on friday evening were likely to buy beer. 

This told walmart that it would be a good idea to draw people's attention to beer on a friday night. 

This amount of data has large amounts of social labeling, preamptive policing based on analytics, prediction coming from big data streams. But at this point, I don't want to get into that. This is one of the issues at play.

## Convergent Technologies
One of the points that Mosco makes in the corperate usage of Big data, within the realm of mobile phones. Much of this information is moving from our device to the datacenter. Much of this performs data analytics. This results in decisions being taken by corperations, etates, etc. and is fed back into IoT.
- IoT is a source of big data all stored and analized in the could. With decision taken by corperations, states etc. Fed back into IoT. 

#### Questions?
> Is there any reason for the 3 V's?
- this is likely because people enjoy alliteration. Volume, Velocity, and Variety. It's getting faster and faster as well as being collected from a variety of different sources. There is more value to it because it's more voluminous, moving at higher velocity... etc.

Anyone else 

``` 
Break
```

## Case Study: Amazon
Ok, now let's make some progress through this case study. You'll be glad to hear I won't be talking alot at you. I'm going to show you video clips, at this point it is an illustration of some of the issues that is used from what is being described. This is not simply a question of technological, it's a corperate interest, specifically the capitalist economy. It is a premiere case of this: Amazon. You can see what this bohemoth of a corperation is considered the world's most valueble company in relation to market value for nearly 800 billion dollars (900 according to NYSE).

Three various types of technology that are operating. I'm going to start with what you see on a webpage, to prescription drugs, real estate, shopping and you will see how data analytics work. How Amazon delivers its products, and how in the smart home and how those facilitate the nature of things. Amazon datacenters (AWS [Amazon Web Services]) of what exactly Cloud Computing means. 

If you're like me, and login frequently to Amazon you are immediately presented with a set of reccomendations, millions of books, etc. They have generated a list that they think will be of interest to me. This is a prime example of Data Analytics: If you liked that, you should like this. This is a rudementary example of what you can do with a large amount of data. This data, of course (list of reccomendations that comes up) is not just generated by my data, but also by millions of others of book buyers. They have correlated patterns that one person bought a book, then bought another book, so they should like another book that someone else liked. This is one of the most prevasive ways of gettting people to make a purchase. 

Lets say that I do make a purchase, The concequence will be that a product is dispatched from a warehouse to a Fulfilment Centre. Amazon is now the 2nd biggest employer in the US. The conditions of work in an Amazon Warehouse have been problematic, with many complaints about extermely intense pace of work, which is accelerated and demanding. It is subject to an array of monitoring. This is in part 

### Robotization

#### [Inside Amazon - BBC (YouTube)](https://youtu.be/Vfi9Isw8WBY?t=168)

The handset counts down in how long you have to find products. The Amazon workers walked ~6k. 1 hour break. On the night shift, walked 11 miles. 
As you can see, they're closely monitored jobs and mentally stressful. Because of the expose and complaints, for several years, Amazon has been Robotizing their warehouses. In some warehouses, the walking duties are now preformed by robots.

#### [Robotizing: Amazon](https://youtu.be/Ox05Bks2Q3s)
This may be better for workers. Here, we have another amplification of the internet of things. This also brings it's own opposition to this. 

#### [Amazon Patents Worker-Tracking Wristbands](https://youtu.be/Ircwh4A7g4g)
Basically, this hand guiding technology / augumentation guides workers hands.

#### [Engadget: Amazon's Box Bot](https://youtu.be/d7J2_vr0ra4)
That was a very quick survey of debates on these new types of technologies guided by big data entering the workplace. This doesn't finish that. In fact, the role of these technologies is not as great as when these items leave the fulfilment center and come to you.

### Prime Delivery
- Trucks
- Planes
- Robots
https://tinyurl.com/y6ofmb9q
- Drones
https://tinyurl.com/y3kdy4r5
- Anticipatory Shipping
https://tinyurl.com/y3vcwhcq
https://tinyurl.com/y3eqev49

### Anticipatory Shipping
This is another wat that amazon filed a patent. They now believe that analyzing the data they own will allow them to want. They will be able to dispatch the item towards the customer fairly confident that the customer would want it or would have already ordered it. If the customer denies it, they give it to the customer as a promotional gift or by sending it to someone similar. They can know what you want ahead of you having ordered it. Discussion: [Amazon Purchases: Shipping before you buy](https://youtu.be/FkNfnjkDFxQ). You may also find [Yesterday Shipping](https://youtu.be/HA_gwzx39LQ). 

### Amazon's Smart Home
[Dash](https://tinyurl.com/y6xhd4m7)
[Alexa](https://time.com/5568815)


## The First Essay
After doing next week's reading. The buisness model, the way in which platform capitalists attempt to make money. How are you positioned as someone who will help supply the profits for Platform Capitalism? In the economic calculus. The Gameplan, whether it be an Amazon, an Uber or a Facebook makes it's money. To make that a bit more concrete (see eg. below).
- Describe one way in whihc you regular interact with Platform Capitalism.
- Make sure you cleary define Platform Capitalism, how and why the involvement you are describing puts you in relation with it.
    - read next week's chapter, where he actively sets out the full plot of what he mans by platform capitalism.
- In the interaction you are describing, what role do you play in the commerical logic of the platform?
- eg. Are you are worker, a customer, a source of data extraction, a target for advertising, some pomposite of all the above or something else entirely?
- Define as precisely as you can, and with concrete examples, how and by what means the platform positions you in the role or roles you describe.
- For example, it is **Not Sufficient* to say "When I use platform x, I am under surveillance" -- You need ot find out,as fasr as you can, what type of surveillance, ,,by what mechanisms, is in play in the example you use.
- So you need to do research on the practices of the platform you are discussing. 
- If there is important information that you need to answer the question but cannot, after serious investigation, find, what does this mean about your relation with platform capitalism?
[Assignment 1]()

