---
title: Terms / Other
author: Brett Petch
category: lecture
layout: category-post
categories: 
    - review
---

Congrats... You found the page! Glhf!

## Political Economy of Media
Examines power relations (political), economics and the means of communication. It is the sector of media that examines the ownership, control and consequences of surveillance. Political economy of media holds importance because of connections between business and media. The Political Economy of Media looks at where revenues are generated, how advertising / surveillance and the relation to information generated by the consumer. Political Economy can be broken into two parts. **Corporate Political Economy** is concerned with issues of ownership, organization, production, advertising and labour in relation to how it can be (further) monetized. **Critical Political Economy** focuses on the same things, however with a twist of it's own, where instead of looking at how to generate more profit, it is based in eliminating inequalities that exist within labour. 

An example of this would be Apple, one of the big tech five and their labour practices. In the early 2000's, one of the primary manufacturers of the iPhone (Foxconn) had a series of worker suicides, and severely underpaid staff. While the Corporate stance of Political Economy would look at the 

## Big Tech
Made up of companies such as Google, Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft and Apple. They provide very highly specific ads for highly specific products and relies heavily on tracking you; placing the consumer in the crosshairs, studying life, habits, etc. These companies are at the forefront of new technologies, and their owners are some of the wealthiest people on earth. Big tech are what examplify Platform Capitalism, broken into Platform and Capitalsim. They exert massive social and commercial power. 

### Platform
A platform is an intermeidary or infrastrucutre that bring consumers and advertisers together. These are FOR PROFIT entities, their business interests being the reason for the ways they act, or their commercial logic. These Platforms are a new business model, distinct from the Fordist and Post-Fordist model. Platforms have a designed core architecture and act to capture and control as much data as possible. This positions platforms in a highly advantageous position for data collection. There are 5 types of platform: Advertising, Cloud, Industrial, Product and Lean each setting itself apart with infrastructure. 

Platforms are typically a cross-subsidized intermediary, wherein they act between different groups (ie. Facebook, Amazon, Google). Each of these companies is unique in the way that they act as an intermediary, but they share two things: infrastructure and cross-subsidization. In Amazon's case, they rent out the cloud as a utility, collecting data at all times through the process. Additionally, Network effects exist within platforms, where high user-counts make it possible for one business to have a monopoly eg: Google (search), Facebook (social media). Finally the core architecture of these platforms is that it acts as an infrastructure for consumers and other businesses alike. 

## Capitalism
Capitalism is rooted in the buying and selling of goods and services for profit. Capitalism emerged from the class of property owners that bought and sold commodities. Eventually, there was a connect to the general marketplace, during the industrial revolution where the manufacturing of products emerged. Capitalism began to spread around the world, class struggle emerged and people were working for low wages. One of the by-products of capitalism was slavery. Areas became colonized and their people became slaves to work in the factories. Capitalism is an outright rejection of ideas by Karl Marx and Adam Smith, where Smith believed that the market works without central authorities and that freedom of choice was important. Both of these theorists were against monopolistic tendencies, etc.

Capitalism is a society that leans towards the commodity, it is a society of general commodification and each day more things are being commodified, such as personal data. It is important to note the relation of capitalism and the state, wherein the free market is often referred to as being 'better' than the state; yet is based in laws and regulation that define how much power a corporation can excert. 

## Techlash
The outright rejection of modern technology itself. Usually aimed at large tech companies and has gained momentum in supporting policies, slowing down innovations, adding taxes, bans and regulation on technologies. 

An example of this would be the large amount of control being held by the big tech five, where if a contrevorsy is named, you see a different way of life, (ie snowden).


### Generalized market exchange
Capacity to work needs to be sold to buy and sell other goods. Companies compete for profits and have strong incentive to increase the speed and scale of goods and services that they provide. 

Eg. Generalized exchange can occour between people, organizations, countries, etc. Participants are not in a position to make individual rewards conditional on behaviour. Eg. helping someone on the side of the road, donating to public good, etc.

### ‘platform capitalism’
The link between power and wealth in relation to media. Interaction between capitalism and technology.

## Laissez-faire Capitalism
Markets were completely unregulated, created a highly volatile environment, like that in the great depression where there were huge unemployment rates, lead to new school of thought (keynesianism). 

Keynesianism is the political economic policy applied to Europe and North America follwoing the crash of the dirty 30's and held sway until the 70's. It was named after John Keynes, who believed that public spending was encouragement to the economy.

## Neoliberalism
Neoliberalism, or new libralism was a deregulation of the market. Neoliberalists believed that government should get out of the economy and allow for less red-tape, and that pushes for competition, no protections, unions, etc. of national industries.

In the media, we can look at the rollback of keynesian, how media itself is a commodity, layoffs in public broadcasting, reduction of regulations for large companies.

### ‘one nation tracked’
Part of the smartphone tracking industries, how companies use geo-locations to identify the location of a consumer. This information is very valuble, high volume, and highly variable information when analytics are combined with it. The topic looks at how valuable geolocation data really is. 

The idea is that companies can predict behaviours because of other data points from other behaviours. Additionally, geo-location data is not obfuscatable, where the data is so personalized that it would be unique.

## Concentration of Ownership
Concentration of ownership is the idea that a sector of the economy is being dominated by a small number of companies. There are two kinds of this: Monopoly and Oligopoly, where mono means one company, and oli means few. Concentration of ownership comes from a group of mergers and acquisitions where companies buy or combine. This results in a conglomerate: a large company with many subsidiaries.

This is an essential part of the political economy of media because it is a thorough examination on the ownership and power relations in the ongoing media. 

### Horizontal Integration
Buying out companies in the same share of the market.

### Vertical Integration
Buying companies in different but connected activities.

## Revenue Streams
How corporations work to commodify media. Two ways:
1. Selling Content: consumers buy things to own them (video games), buy access (movie ticket) or subscribe (nf)

2. Selling Ads: Consumers get content, ads attract attention.
- Gathering Data: Using or selling to another corporation to attract better content and advertising.

## Mega-Mega-Media
5 years ago, mega-media were corporations that would buy smaller companies and gain more control over a sector trying to get a monopoly status. Today, conglomerates are trying to gain control over eachother. 

## Marketization

## Digital Capitalisim

## Commodification

## Mega-Conglomerate

## Net Neutrality
Idea that all internet traffic should be treated the same. Open internet idea. In US: FCC repealed net neutrality. IE: speeds could be throttled for anything other than sponsored or media-company run content. 

## Internet History
### The Military Net
Network founded in 1970's as part of Nuclear War Planning and Research. It was part of the (D)ARPA that was created to enable communications should no other line of communication be viable. The internet was created for a military purpose, and should be looked at through a political lens.

### The Electronic Frontier
USG allowed for allowed for university students and instructors to use the internet for research and rapidly spread connecting more and more people. A this time, internet was text-based. non-commericalized.
### Web 1.0
WWW: 1990's starts to change to the electronic frontier. Introduces graphic display, moving away from only text. Creators that saw the internet was free and open rather than made for profit. USG were interested in the Information Highway (internet) for economic growth. 

Was a response to the economic slump from the mid 70's through 2000's. People looking for major economic boost to help bring economy out of slump.

### The dot.com Bubble
Investments in internet and e-businesses. Digital presence starting to replace brick and mortar stores. ISPs didn't give full internet access, but rather access to websites that paid ISPs for users to access it. There was no clear revenue, many popups. 

### Web 2.0: Tim O’Reilly 2005
After the stock market crash (dot com bubble burst), a new wave of companies appeared, including new 

#### Centralization
Large corps continue to dominate, Ie. Google in search, Facebook in SM (platform owners have become giants).  Concerned with how much power centralized corporations have question social issues and power issues, concentration of ownership and surveillance.

#### Consolidation
Combining legacy media (hollywood) with new media (SV) entering the business together... Relevance being in that hollywood is now second to these new media, currently the big tech 5 hold the most power in media.

#### Commercialization
Advertising as a revenue model causes social concerns.

## Platform Capitalism
A new business model/a new way of organizing business. Distinct from models of the past such as
### Fordist Model
Mass production and mass consumption of one same product. Vertical integration: control over the cars and everything that goes within it.

### Post-Fordist Model
Individualized consumption rather than mass production. Idea of a lean business (cut out unprofitable stuffs). 

## Platforms


### Intermediaries

### Infrastructures

### Designed Core Architecture

### Advertising Platform

### Cloud Platform

### Industrial Platform

### Product Platform

### Lean Platform

### Cloud Computing

#### Data Centres

#### Cloud Platforms

## 3) big data

### Big Data Analytics

#### Analytics

## 2) Internet of Things

### Covergent Technologies (Mosco)

### Anticipatory shipping

# Big Tech 5

## Monopoly platforms

## Oligopolistic Tendencies

## Network Effects

## Convergence

## Silos

## Huawei

## The Cambridge Analytica Scandal

## Facebook

## The psychometrics institute:

## Italian automatism

## Nick Srnicek 5 types of platform capitalism

## The long downturn

